ALTERNATIVE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 2010
Act No. XIV OF 2010
[25th May, 2010]
An Act to provide for establishment of Alternative Energy Development Board
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for establishment of Alternative Energy Development
Board (AEDB) as an autonomous body for the purpose of implementation of various policies,
programmes and projects in the field of Alternative or Renewable Energy Technologies;
AND WHEREAS the objective of the Alternative Energy Development Board is to assist and
facilitates development and generation of Alternative or Renewable Energy in order to achieve
sustainable economic growth with transfer of technology.
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.__(1) This Act may be called the Alternative
Energy Development Board Act, 2010.
It extends to the whole of Pakistan.
It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions.-(1) this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,___
(a) “alternative or renewable energy" means energy that is produced by alternative
or renewable resources as compared to the conventional or that are replenished
naturally which do not deplete when consumed and are non-polluting and
environment friendly;
(b) "Board" means Alternative Energy Development Board (AEDB), established
under section 3:
(c) “Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board:
(d) "Chief Executive Officer (CEO)" means the Chief Executive Officer of the
Board appointed under section 5;
(e) "Chief Secretary" means Chief Secretary of a Province;
(f) "Fund" means the Alternative Energy Fund (AEF) established under section
13;
(g) "Institute" means Institute of Alternative and Renewable Energy Technologies
established under section 11;
(h) “Member” means Member of the Board;
(i) “organization” means an organization of alternative and renewable energy
established under section 10;
(j) “prescribed” means prescri bed by rules or regulations made under this Act;
(k) “President” means President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan;
(l) “Prime Minister” means Prime Minister of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan;
(m) “Provincial Secretary” means a Secretary of a Provi ncial Government;
(n) “regulations” means the regulations made under this Act; and
(o) “rules” means the rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD
3. Establishment of the Board.__(1) There shall be established an Alternative Energy
Development Board for carrying out the purposes and objectives of this Act. ·
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal,
with administrative and financial powers, subject to the provisions of this Act, to enter _into
agreements, contracts, acquire and hold property, both moveable and immoveable and to sue and be
sued in its name.
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Islamabad and the Board may set up sub-
offices at such place or places as it may deem necessary.
(4) The Board shall consist of the Chairman and Members.
4. Chairman of the Board. __The Chairman of the Alternative Energy Development
Board shall be appointed by the Federal Government on such terms and conditions as may be
determined by the Federal Government.
5. Terms and conditions of office of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).__(1)The
Chief Executive Officer shall be appointed by the Federal Government and the terms and conditions
of the Chief Executive Officer, his remuneration and privileges shall be such as may be determined
by the Federal Government.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall be an eminent engineering professional of known
integrity, competence and expertise in handling Alternative Energy development projects.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may resign from his office by giving one month notice,
by writing under his own hand, addressed to the Federal Government. The age of Chief Executive
Officer shall not be more than sixty five years.
(4) The Chief Executive Officer will be answerable to the Board for all administrative,
financial and technical matters of the Board. The Board may delegate such administrative and
financial powers to the Chief Executive Officer for carrying out day to day affairs of the Board.
6. Members of the Board.__(1) The composition of the Board shall be as follows:-
(a) Chairman;
(b) Secretary, Finance Division or his nominee not below the rank of Additional
Secretary or equivalent;
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Water and Power or his nominee not below the rank of
Additional Secretary or equivalent:
(d) Secretary, Planning and Development Division or his nominee not below the
rank of Additional Secretary or equivalent;
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources or his nominee not
below the rank of Additional Secretary or equivalent;
(f) Secretary, Ministry of Science and Technology or his nominee not below the
rank of Additional Secretary or equivalent;
(g) Secretary, Ministry of Environment or his nominee not below the rank of
Additional Secretary or equivalent:
(h) Six Members from private sector, of whom at least three shall be experts on
alternative energy, as full-time Members to be appointed by the Prime
Minister on the recommendations of the Board;
(i) Chief Secretaries of the governments of Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
Punjab and Sindh or their nominees, not below the rank of Provincial
Secretary; and
(j) The Chief Executive Officer of the AEDB.
(2) The Secretary of the Board shall be appointed by the Federal Government on the
recommendations of the Board.
(3) The Federal Government may increase or decrease the number of Members of the
Board from time to time as it may consider appropriate.
(4) The Federal Government may prescribe the qualifications and mode of appointment
of Members from private sector in such manner as it may consider appropriate.
(5) The business of the Board shall be conducted as prescribed.
(6) One-half of the total membership of the Board shall constitute the quorum and in case
of equality of votes the Chairman shall have the casting vote.
(7) In the absence of the Chairman, a Member designated by the Chairman shall preside
over the Board meeting.
7. Terms and conditions of office of Members.___(1) A Member, other than an ex r
officio Member, shall be appointed by the Federal Government for a period of three years,
extendable for another term of three years.
(2) A Member, other than ex officio Member. may at any time resign from his office by
giving one month's notice, in writing under his own hand, addressed to the Federal Government.
(3) The Federal Government may remove any Member, other than ex officio Member, on
grounds of misconduct and physical incapacitation.
8. Functions of the Board.___ The functions of the Board shall be following, namely:___
(a) to develop national strategy, policies and plans for utilization of alternative
and renewable energy resources to achieve the targets approved by the Federal
Government in consultation with the Board;
(b) to act as a forum for evaluating, monitoring and certification of alternative or
renewable energy projects and products;
(c) to act as a coordinating agency for commercial application of alternative or
renewable technology; and
(d) to facilitate energy generation through alternative or renewable energy
resources by,-
(i) acting as one window facility for establishing, promoting and
facilitating ·alternative or renewable energy projects based on wind,
solar, micro-hydel, fuel cells, tidal, ocean, biogas, biomass, etc;
(ii) setting up alternative and renewable energy projects on it's own or
through joint venture or partnership with public or private entities in
order to create awareness and motivation of the need to take such
initiatives for the benefit of general public as well as by evaluating
concepts and technologies from technical and financial perspective;
(iii) conducting feasibility studies and surveys to identify opportunities for
power generation and other applications through alternative and
renewable energy resources:
(iv) undertaking technical, financial and economic evaluation of the
alternative or renewable energy proposals as well as providing
assistance in filing of required licensing applications and tariff
petitions to National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (NEPRA)
established under the Regulation of Generation, Transmission and
Distribution of Electric Power Act, 1997 (XL of 1997):
(v) interacting and co-ordinating with national and international agencies
for promotion and development of alternative energy;
(vi) assisting the development and implementation of plans with concerned
authorities and provincial governments and special areas for off-grid
electrification or rural areas: and
(vii) making legislative proposals to enforce use and installation of
equipment utilizing renewable energy.
9. Committees of Board.__(1) The Board may, for carrying out its functions, constitute
such committees, from time to time, as may be considered appropriate by the Board.
(2) The committees shall conduct their business in such manner as may he prescribed by
the Hoard.
I0. Organization of the Board.___(1) The Board may, for carrying out tts functions for
promotion of alternative and renewable energy, development of alternative and renewable energy
technologies, certification of alternative and renewable energy products and projects and project
management may establish one or more organizations as it may consider necessary.
(2) The organization established under sub-section (1) shall be subject to control and
supervision of the Board and shall function within the framework of this Act.
(3) An organization established under sub-section (I) shall perform such business as may
be prescribed by regulations by the Board for the purpose.
11. Institute of Alternative and Renewable Energy Technologies. (1) The Board may,
for carrying out its functions of commercial application of alternative or renewable energy and
corresponding human resource development in the area of alternative and renewable energy,
establish an Institute of Renewable Energy Technologies.
(2) The Institute shall conduct the business in such manner as may be prescribed by
regulations by the Board.
12. Appointment of officers and staff of the Board.-(1) The Board may appoint such
officers, experts, advisors, consultants and members of staff as it may consider necessary for the
efficient performance of its functions on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) The officers, members of the staff, advisors, consultants and experts and other persons
appointed by. the Board shall not be civil servants within the meaning of the Civil Servants Act, I
973 (LXXI of l 973).
(3) The Chairman and non-official Members of the Board, officers, advisors. consultants,
employees and staff of the Board when acting or purporting to act under any of the provisions of this
Act, or rules and regulations, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21
of Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).
CHAPTER III
FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
13. Alternative Energy Fund.___(1) There shall be established a non lapsable fund
vesting in the Board to be known as the “Alternative Energy Fund” for the purpose of meeting
expenses in connection with the functions and operations of the Board, Institute, Projects and
Organizations under this Act, including payment of salaries and other remuneration payable to the
CEO, Members, members of its staff, experts, consultants, advisors and other officers and employees
of the Board, Institute and the Organizations.
(2) The fund shall consist of,-
(a) funds provided by the Federal Government for payment of salaries
establishing infrastructure and running the day to day business of the Board:
(b) loans or grants by the Federal Government or any Provincial Government or
local authority;
(c) other loans or funds obtained by the Board;
(d) foreign aid, grants and loans negotiated and raised, or otherwise obtained
by the Board, directly or through the Economic Affairs Division;
(e) charges for services or for the provision of any information or report
automated or otherwise to any government, private or any other person or
entity;
(f) fees and commissions collected by the Board as prescribed from time to time;
(g) income from the sale of moveable or immoveable property;
(h) funds from floating bonds, shares, debentures, commercial papers, or other
securities issued by the Board or through any other means;
(i) all other sums received or earned by the Board; and
(j) income from investments; receipts.
(3) The Alternative Energy Fund shall be kept in one or more accounts maintained by the
Board, in local or foreign currency in any commercial bank in Pakistan and shall be operated in
accordance with the directions of the Board.
(4) The Federal Government shall fund al I administrative, operational and any other
expenses:
Provided that the responsibility of the Federal Government to exclusively fund the operations
and functions of the Board shall cease at such appropriate time when in the opinion of the Federal
Government the Board shall have become capable of funding its functions and operations envisaged
under this Act to be funded by the Board;
14. Accounts and audit.___(1) The Board, Institute and Organizations, shall prepare their
own budget in respect of each financial year, in accordance with the prescribed procedure and shall
maintain complete and accurate books of accounts of their actual expenses, and receipts including
that of the Alternative Energy Fund.
(2) The accounts of the Board, Institute and Organizations, shall be audited by a reputable
firm of Chartered Accountants, who arc. within the meaning of the CharteredAccountants Ordinance,
1961 (X of 1961) appointed by the Board in consultation with the Auditor-General of Pakistan, from
a panel of chartered accountants proposed by the Board on such terms and conditions as the Board
may determine.
(3) The Auditors appointed under sub-section (2) shall be provided access to the books,
accounts and other documents as may be considered necessary by them for audit of the accounts.
(4) The Auditor-General may conduct each year external audit of the Board as per
Auditor General's (Functions, Powers and Terms and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2001 (XXIII
of 2001).
CHAPTER IV
MISCELLANEOUS
15. Delegation of powers.___(1) The Board may delegate all or any of its powers and
functions to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) subject to such conditions and limitations, as it may
prescribe.
(2) The Board may delegate all or any of its powers and functions under this Act to any
Member or Officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, as may be prescribed.
16. Issuance of policy directives.___ The Federal Government may, as and when it
considers necessary, issue policy directives to the Board in respect of its activities and the
compliance of such directives shall be binding on the Board.
17. Annual report.___ On conclusion of each financial year, the Chief Executive Officer
shall submit an annual report to the Federal Government in respect of al I activities of the Board
including the status of its existing programmes, projects and future plans formulated in furtherance
of its aims and objectives and the Federal Government shall cause a copy of the report to be
presented in the Committees of the National Assembly and Senate and to he laid before the
Parliament.
18. Power to make rules.___ The Federal Government may, on the recommendations of
the Board, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
19. Power to make regulations.___(1) The Board, may make regulations, not inconsistent
with this Act and the rules, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing provisions, the regulations may
provide for.___
(a) disciplinary proceedings and award of punishments;
(b) terms and conditions alongwith remuneration and privileges, etc. appointments
of officers, staff members, experts, advisors and consultants etc;
(c) prescription of different scales and grades etc. for the remuneration and
privileges of officers, staff members, experts, advisors and consultants of the
Board;
(d) procedure for appointment of members of different committees and laying
down regulations for the conduct of their business; and
(e) all or any of the matters which by this Act are to be or may be prescribed by
the regulations.
20. Authorities to aid the Board.___ All executive authorities in the Federation and in the
Provinces shall render such assistance to the Board as may be necessary for the execution of its
programmes and projects being carried out under this Act.
21. Indemnity of the Board.___ No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding-shall lie
against the Board; the Chairman, the Chief Executive 1Officer (CEO), the Members, professionals,
officers, advisors, consultants, another persons and employees of the Board, in respect of anything
done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
22. Removal of difficulties. __If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions
of this Act, the President may make such order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
may appear to be necessity of removing the difficulty.
23. Dissolution of Board. Upon the commencement of this Act, the Alternative Energy
Development Board established vide Notification No. F. 1/7/2003-Admn II, dated 12th May 2003,
thereinafter referred to as the former Board shall stand dissolved and upon such dissolution.___
(a) all asset, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and property; moveable and
immoveable, cash and bank balance, reserve funds, investments and all, other
interests and rights in or arising out of such property and all debts, liabilities
and obligations of whatever kind of the former Board subsisting immediately
before its dissolution shall stand transferred to vest in the Board;
(b) all officers and other employees of the former Board shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in any law or in any agreement, deed, document or other
instrument, stand transferred to the Board and shall be deemed to have been
appointed or engaged by the Board in accordance with the terms and
conditions of service applicable to them: and no officer or other employee
whose services arc so transferred shall be entitled to any compensation
because of such transfer;
(c) all debts and obligations incurred or contracts entered into or rights acquired
and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the former Board
before its dissolution shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into,
acquired or engaged to be done by, with or for the Board; and
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted by or against the former Board
before its dissolution shall be deemed to be suits and proceedings by or against
the Board and may be proceeded or otherwise dealt with accordingly.
24. Exemption from taxes.-Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax
Ordinance, 2001 (XLIX of 2001), or any other law for the time being in force relating lo income tax,
the Board shall not be liable to pay any such tax on its income, investment, capital profit, wealth,
gifts or gains.